There are many special matrices in linear algebra special matrices have special properties or they are
used for very specific purposes.
In this video I'm going to tell you about a couple of special matrices.
Just as a way of introduction and in the exercise you're also going to learn about the strategy for
basically learning about new special matrices.
And again this is consistent with my main goal of creating this course is to show you how to use python
as a tool to learn about particular topics in mathematics.
In this case though in this video about one specific kind of a special matrix.
All right let's begin this matrix is called an identity matrix an identity matrix is a matrix that has
all zeros everywhere except for the diagonal which contains all ones and the identity matrix is always
a square matrix so it has the same number of rows as it has columns.
So this is a general form of the identity matrix.
All the dots around here indicate that this matrix can keep going you know for many many rows many many
columns the identity matrix is often indicated using a capital boldface letter.
I like this.
Sometimes you'll see a subscript.
This would mean the two by two identity matrix.
This would mean the five by five identity matrix.
And if it doesn't really matter exactly what the size is then you'll just see the letter.
I like this.
Here you see a zeros matrix.
This is called the zeros matrix.
It is very simply a matrix of all zeros.
It's also typically Square and it's indicated not surprisingly using a zero.
But this is always a boldface zero.
So this is not the same zero as what this would be.
Here we have a diagonal matrix so a diagonal matrix actually initially looks a bit like the identity
matrix.
It's a matrix of all zeros except for the diagonals which contain non zeros.
The main difference between a diagonal matrix and an identity matrix is that the identity matrix contains
only ones on the diagonal whereas a more general diagonal matrix can contain other values.
As long as they are not equal to or as long as the off diagonal elements are not non zeros.
Now a diagonal matrix doesn't have to be square so this is a square matrix.
You can also have non square matrices or rectangular matrices that are still diagonals so notice that
this is the diagonal the diagonal can contain zeroes but it's the only part of the matrix that is allowed
to contain non-zero elements.
So I just mentioned that an identity matrix is a form of a diagonal matrix and in fact if you have a
diagonal matrix that square and where all of the diagonal elements are the same then in fact you can
write this a little bit more simply as some numbers some factor times the identity matrix.
So this matrix here is just 2 times the identity matrix.
All right so that is a diagonal matrix.
The last kind of special matrix that I'm going to introduce you to here before switching to Python is
called a triangular matrix triangular.
Now that doesn't mean that the matrix is shaped like a triangle.
The Matrix is still shaped like a square but only either the lower diagonal or the upper diagonal matrix
contains all zeros.
So this is called an upper triangular matrix because only the diagonal and the elements above the diagonal
can contain non-zero elements.
This is called a lower triangular matrix because only the diagonal elements and the elements below the
matrix are allowed to contain non-zero elements.
So here all of these elements are zero and all of these elements are zero.
All right let's switch to Python and we will see how to implement some of these special matrices.
A lot of special matrices are used so often that they have their own functions to generate them.
So for example the identity matrix is created by this function called AI.
It's a pretty clever name.
Whoops I have to put an equal sign here.
So I equals the identity matrix.
Now let's print this out so print I.
So here you see there's all zeros and ones on the diagonal.
So that's the four by four identity matrix.
We can also make a seven by seven identity matrix.
The zeros matrix is given by you guessed it the function called zeros and in fact I've already introduced
you to this function before.
So we can write one number here and see print Z.
However this is actually going to give us a vector of four zeros not a matrix so to create a matrix
you need to use or you need to input a tuples.
That would be an extra set of parentheses so let's say for comma.
For now the reason why the input is different here.
So here you only input a single number.
And here you have to input a tuple of numbers.
Is that the identity matrix is only defined for a square matrix so all identity matrices are square
matrices.
So it's a bit redundant to say 7 7 because for example you can't have a 7 by 4 identity matrix.
Of course you can create a matrix that's 7 by 4 and it has ones on the diagonal but that's not formally
the identity matrix but a 0 is matrix can be any size so we can have a 4 by 14 zeros matrix and that
is well-defined.
Okay.
Now we have a diagonal matrix.
Now there's two functions in the NUM pi tool box that are called diagonal or related to diagonal.
One is this function Diak and you can input a vector here so let's say 1 4 6 3 and how about I make
this last one zero.
Now I fly print D.
What happens is that num PI will create a diagonal matrix where these elements in this vector are on
the diagonals so 1 4 6 3 and 0.
So this function is creating a diagonal matrix from me specifying just the diagonal elements.
There is a related function which is the word diagonal so that num piled up.
I go No and this is actually doing the opposite.
So here we've created a matrix based on inputting a vector here I'm inputting an entire matrix and what
it's going to return is the vector of the diagonal elements.
Let me comment this out here.
So here we just get a vector.
Now this is the same thing that I wrote here but we can also input let's say a random numbers matrix.
So if I write num piled up random round n and let's make a habit a six by six random matrix then even
though I'm creating a six by six matrix the output of this diagonal function is just six numbers because
these are the numbers that happen to be on the diagonal.
The final special matrix that I discussed was the triangular matrix.
So to create a triangular matrix you could think of you know ran random random and let's start with
a like a 15 by 15 matrix.
Now to create a triangular matrix you could think of doing something like you know having a double for
loop and looping through all the rows and looping through all the columns of this matrix and saying
well if the row index is greater than the column index and set that element to 0 totally fine but that's
a lot of extra code you're likely to make mistakes.
Instead you can use a function called num pi.
Try for a triangular and then you for upper.
Okay.
Well still kind of hard to see what this looks like here.
Why don't we make an image of this instead.
So let's write I am sorry P L T that I am show and then P O T dot show.
All right.
So here you see we've created a triangular an upper triangular matrix based on a random numbers matrix
and just to prove to you that this is really knocking out all these elements down here we can remove
that function.
And now you see it's a dense matrix every element has a non zero value.
And now we have a upper triangular matrix and you've probably already guessed that to create a lower
triangular matrix.
You write try L for lower.
So this is now a lower triangular random numbers matrix because all the elements above the diagonal
are zero there are two exercises associated with this video.
The first is to create a four by four matrix of random integers so not just random numbers but random
integers that vary between and including minus four and plus four.
And then once you've created this matrix multiply it by the identity matrix you have to make sure that
the identity matrix is the correct size.
And then multiply it by an upper triangular random numbers matrix and this matrix doesn't need to be
random integers it can just be an upper triangular random numbers matrix.
Okay so that is the first part.
The second exercise is to create what's called a two plates matrix.
Now if you don't know what a two plates matrix is then that's great.
This is going to be really fun if you do know what a tuple it's matrix is then you can figure out how
to create it in Python.
If you don't know already.
If you have no idea what a tuple it's matrix is then my recommendation is you can use the Internet to
search only for how to create a two plus matrix.
Don't look up on the Internet.
What a two puts matrix is or what it means.
Instead just figure out how to implement it in Python and then use python as a tool as a guide to help
you explore what a two bullets matrix is and how it's created.
All right so I hope you enjoy working through this exercise and I assume that by now you've paused the
video or you're about to pause video because I am going to spoil the fun by switching of Python and
start coding for you.
All right.
So we need a new cell down here.
So I'm going to create a matrix of random integers.
I call this into Matt for an integer matrix so there is a function called random dot Rand int.
And let's see how this function works.
So this function says low high equals none in size equals none.
So that means that it's going to return whoops scroll down here.
Random integers from low inclusive to high exclusive according to the size specified by the third input.
So we want random integers between minus 4 and the upper value should be 4.
Except that here we have to specify that exclusively.
So we actually have to write five in order to make sure that the largest number is four.
And then the size is going to be four by four.
So lots of four is going here.
And let's have a look at what this looks like.
So.
And Matt.
All right.
So here we see a matrix of random integers and at the smallest number is minus four the largest number
is plus four.
And you keep running this over and over again and see what numbers you happen to get.
All right.
So now we have that.
Now I want to create the identity matrix and the identity matrix needs to be four by four because it's
going to multiply by this matrix and that matrix multiplication is valid only if this is if this is
a four by four matrix.
All right.
And then we need an upper triangular random matrix.
So I'll call that upper four and that's going to be equal to num pi to try upper and then inside the
try upper function or try you function I generate a random random number matrix that is four by four.
All right.
So now we have all three of these matrices.
And now I just want to multiply them.
Let's see print and match.
And actually I think I'll do it this way I'll print the original matrix and then I'll print it.
Matt time's I for and let's see what that looks like well these are right on top of each other.
I think it would be nice just visually to have a little bit of space between these two matrices.
I'm going to write print and then slash n.
This is for the new line character.
See that gives me a space here.
Okay.
And now it's pretty interesting.
These numbers are basically all the same.
Well not basically they are exactly the same.
So multiplying a matrix by the identity matrix gives back the original matrix so numerically we haven't
changed anything.
And that's actually the idea of the identity matrix.
That's why the identity matrix is important.
That's also why it's called the identity matrix.
Any matrix times the identity matrix is the same matrix.
OK so this is an important point.
So numerically mathematically we haven't changed the matrix at all.
However in terms of the computer representing these matrices we actually have changed the matrix A little
bit.
So this is an integer as matrix.
This matrix is all integers and this matrix you can see the decimal point these are floating numbers.
So let's look at this.
I'm going to say instead of printing out the matrix I'm going to print out the type of the matrix or
the class the way that the computer is representing these two matrices right.
Well of course these are both num pi arrays.
Actually what I meant to do is this.
So we want to know the data type.
So this is an integer so intimate is in 32.
So this is represented by the computer as integers.
And then here when we multiply it by the identity matrix to type this now becomes a floating point representation.
So in terms of the numerical precision the representation by the computer multiplying by the identity
matrix in this particular case because these are integers actually has changed the representation of
the numbers but numerically in terms of like math we haven't actually changed the matrix by multiplying
it by the identity matrix.
All right.
Let's do that same thing for multiplying by the upper triangular matrix.
Okay.
And here you see the result is a dense matrix.
Now this shouldn't be too surprising considering the mechanism of matrix multiplication that you learned
about in a previous video where it's all about dot products between rows and columns.
However I think it's still useful to see that just because you have a lot of zeros in a matrix when
you multiply that by another matrix you're not necessarily going to get a product matrix that also has
a lot of zeros.
All right.
So that was for the first part of this exercise.
And the next part was to investigate what a two plates matrix is and how it's created.
So to create a two plates matrix you actually need to import these CI pi modules on your right import
side pi as s.
And then there's a function here called SPDR Lin ouch dot two plates.
And here we can input some numbers.
Let's go for Range 1 through 5 like this.
OK.
And now what I'm gonna do is let's see let's print out the Matrix 2 or maybe you pronounces toe but
it's short for 2 plates and I'm also gonna make an image of this so appeal to that I am show to all
right.
This is a feature of say PI that you have to actually import the functions or these sub modules directly.
So let's see.
We want to from Sai pi dot Lin LJ import explicitly the two plates function.
Okay.
Let's see.
And now I believe this should work.
Okay.
So here we go.
So we have this function two plates.
It's in the Sai pi Lin LJ module and I've input it into this tuple its function a vector the numbers
1 through 5.
And here's what it looks like in terms of numbers.
And here is when an image of this matrix looks like.
So what you'll notice is that these numbers 1 through 5 become the off diagonals so the main diagonal
is 1 the next diagonal.
Then the next off diagonal is 2 and then 3 and then 4 and 5.
And same thing for the lower triangular here so I hope you enjoyed this video you learned about a couple
of different kinds of special matrices and linear algebra how to create them using functions in Python
and I showed you how to use python as a tool to understand what a two plates matrix is two plates matrices
are pretty useful they're used in statistics in polynomial fitting and so on.